JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
Congressional
Budget Office releases projected
costs of
the GOP's health care bill,
while the White
House and Republicans question
the agency's
analysis.
Then: ahead of Rex Tillerson's
trip to Asia,
a look at the secretary of
state's low profile
in the Trump administration.
And I sit down with former Vice
President
Al Gore to talk about restoring
the United
States information ecosystem in
the age of
Trump.
AL GORE, Former Vice President
of the United
States: A false belief collides
with physical
reality.
We are seeing every night on the
television
news now a nature hike through
the Book of
Revelation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Congressional
Budget Office
is out tonight with its analysis
of the Republican
health care bill.
It includes the nonpartisan
agency's best
estimates on cost, coverage and
other issues.
Our Lisa Desjardins has been
looking at the
numbers, and she joins me now.
Lisa, what's the headline here?
LISA DESJARDINS: There are
several, but let's
start with a very big one.
What will this mean for health
insurance coverage
for Americans?
The Congressional Budget Office
looked at
the numbers and found that this
Republican
bill in just the first year,
next year, would
mean some 14 million Americans
who have insurance
now wouldn't have it.
The ranks of the uninsured would
go up and
they would continue to go up.
Next year, that's because, Judy,
they say
the mandate ends.
So people would choose no longer
to have coverage
because there is no mandate
penalty.
That shifts in 2024, where we
see now another
24 million Americans or a total
of 24 million
Americans over now uninsured.
And it grows because of the
Medicaid changes,
largely Medicaid cuts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling that members
of Congress, that the White
House and others
have already been commenting on
this.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
We had very quick reaction from
congressional
Democrats.
Let's start with House Minority
Leader Nancy
Pelosi.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
The CBO has reported that the
Republican bill
pushes 24 million people out of
health care,
off of health coverage.
This is a remarkable figure.
It speaks so eloquently to the
cruelty of
a bill that the speaker called
an act of mercy.
I don't know if he thinks it's
an act of mercy
to all the people who will lose
coverage
LISA DESJARDINS: And, Judy,
Republicans didn't
waste time either.
The White House -- new Health
and Human Services
Secretary Tom Price spoke.
He thinks these numbers on CBO
coverage are
wrong.
TOM PRICE, U.S. Health and Human
Services
Secretary: It basically says
that we will
be right back at pre-Obamacare
status with
about 40 million people
uninsured in this
country.
We believe that the plan that
we're putting
in place is going to insure more
individuals
than currently are insured.
So, we think that the CBO simply
has it wrong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, CBO,
Congressional
Budget Office, also looked at
what is going
to happen to premiums and their
costs.
What did they say about that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
That is the other big personal
effect of this.
And is a mixed bag.
Let's look at what the CBO found
there.
In the next two years, the
Congressional Budget
Office found that actually this
plan will
increase premiums overall.
They say that's because healthy
people will
leave.
The mandate penalty is removed
and people
that don't have to have care
will leave.
But then, after that, they say,
that the premiums
will actually go down.
And that's because there will be
more choices,
that there will no longer be
these bronze
plans, silver plans.
There will be bare-bones
insurance plans that
are not allowed now.
And they think more people will
choose them,
premiums will go down.
But one very important note,
Judy.
They think it's by age.
So premiums will likely go up
for older Americans
in general.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which people we
will of course
be paying attention to across
the board.
And, finally, Lisa, what about
the effect
on the budget?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
This is something Republicans
care about dearly.
The CBO found something that
Republicans like.
They say that this Republican
plan would save
over $300 billion in the deficit
over the
next 10 years.
How does it do that?
Well, a large part of that is
the Medicaid
cuts, over $800 billion in
Medicaid cuts in
this.
But Republicans for a long time
have felt
that Medicaid spending was out
of control.
They're reining it in here.
That's going to be a very big
debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Lisa
Desjardins, I know
you have only had an hour or two
to look at
this.
It came out after 4:00 Eastern
this afternoon.
Thank you.
And we will continue to look at
the impact
of the CBO report.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
In the day's other news: The
Northeastern
U.S. is bracing for a late
winter snowstorm
that could bring up to 20 inches
of snow tonight.
A blizzard watch is in effect
through tomorrow
evening for New York City, parts
of New Jersey
and Connecticut.
Preparations were under way
today in New York
and elsewhere, with mayors
urging people to
stay inside and not take
chances.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: This
kind of snow coming down this
intensely, again,
it's dangerous.
It'll be dangerous to be on the
roads.
I want to urge everyone now to
make plans
to not be out on the roads
tomorrow, first
and foremost for your own
safety, but second
and very important, so that all
of the good
people at the sanitation
department can do
their job and clear the roads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even before it
arrived, the
storm caused disruptions.
Airlines canceled some 6,000
flights, and
New York City called off school
tomorrow.
The state of Washington went to
federal court
today to stop President Trump's
revised travel
ban.
The executive order temporarily
blocks refugees
and travelers from six
Muslim-majority countries.
California is joining
Washington's suit, along
with Minnesota, New York and
Oregon.
Hawaii has already filed its own
challenge.
The White House is now saying
the president
wasn't speaking literally when
he accused
President Obama of wiretapping
Trump Tower.
Adviser Kellyanne Conway
suggested over the
weekend that it might have been
some other
form of surveillance.
Today, she acknowledged that she
has no evidence.
Press Secretary Sean Spicer
followed up at
the daily White House briefing.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
He doesn't really think that
President Obama
went up and tapped his phone
personally.
But I think that there's no
question that
in the Obama administration that
there were
actions about surveillance and
other activities
that occurred in the 2016
election.
The president used the word
wiretap in quotes
to mean broadly surveillance and
other activities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The House
Intelligence Committee
also asked that the Justice
Department to
provide any evidence of
wiretapping by today.
The U.S. Senate moved this
evening to confirm
Seema Verma to oversee the
government's Office
and Medicare and Medicaid.
The Indiana health care
consultant will be
charged with directing key
changes, if congressional
Republicans push through heir
replacement
for Obamacare.
In Syria, last year was the most
dangerous
yet for children since the civil
war began
six years ago.
The U.N. Children's Relief
Agency, UNICEF,
reports that at least 652 Syrian
children
were killed in 2016.
That's up 20 percent from 2015.
The number recruited to fight
doubled to more
than 850, with some acting as
executioners
and suicide bombers.
The U.S. military confirms that
it's begun
deploying attack drones to South
Korea to
counter what it calls North
Korea's continued
provocative actions.
The move follows Pyongyang's
recent nuclear
and missile tests.
and it comes just days after the
Pentagon
sent an advanced anti-missile
system to the
South.
Scottish leader, Nicola
Sturgeon, called today
for a new referendum on
independence.
The nation's first minister in
Edinburgh,
and said most Scots oppose
leaving the European
Union, and that's cause to
reconsider independence.
NICOLA STURGEON, Scottish First
Minister:
Right now, we're on a path not
just to Brexit,
but to hard Brexit, that will
have profound
implications for our economy,
our society,
our culture, our place in the
world, sense
of who we are.
And we have no control over
that.
We voted against it, but
nevertheless that
is the direction the U.K.
government is intent
on taking us in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a 2014
referendum, 55 percent
of Scottish voters rejected
independence.
The British Parliament would
have to authorize
a new vote.
And on Wall Street, stocks
mostly searched
for direction.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 21 points
to close at 20881.
The Nasdaq rose 14 points, and
the S&P 500
added about a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the costs
of the Republican plan to
replace Obamacare;
the fog in Foggy Bottom, the low
profile of
Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson; crisis in
South Sudan, famine and civil
unrest strike
the world's newest nation; and
much more.
South Sudan, famine and civil
unrest strike
the world's newest nation; and
much more.
Now reaction to the analysis of
the Republican
health care bill by the budget
office of Congress.
As we report a few moments ago,
it is forecasting
that 24 million fewer people
would be insured
after a decade and it would
reduce the deficit
by more $300 billion over 10
years.
Our John Yang gets some analysis
now.
JOHN YANG: And, for that, we
turn to two experts
who watch this all closely, Zeke
Emanuel,
who is one of the original
architects of the
Affordable Care Act, or
Obamacare.
He's chair of the University of
Pennsylvania's
Department of Medical Ethics and
Health Policy.
And Lanhee Chen, a fellow at the
Hoover Institution,
who advised both Mitt Romney and
Marco Rubio
in their presidential campaigns.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Dr. Emanuel, let me start with
you.
The big headline number out of
this, 24 million
fewer with health insurance
after a period
after this.
That is more than who were added
to the rolls
by Obamacare.
What's your reaction?
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL, Former White
House Special
Adviser: Well, by 2026, one in
five Americans
are going to lack health
insurance if this
plan goes through, according to
the CBO.
And lest Americans think, oh,
this is only
people on Medicaid or people who
got Obamacare,
the CBO estimates seven million
people who
have employer insurance today
will lose coverage.
So, if you're getting coverage
through your
employer, it's not guaranteed
under this plan.
And the big, positive news for
the Republicans
sounds puny in comparison.
All those people losing
coverage, and the
deficit goes down $34 billion
per year.
This sounds like no home run at
all for them,
and a real albatross.
One out of five Americans, no
health insurance,
maybe that's acceptable in some
places like
Texas, but I don't think across
the country,
it's something we're going to
find very tolerable.
They also point out that the
extensive coverage
under this plan, what your
insurance actually
covers, is going to go down, so
people are
going to be responsible for more
out of their
own pocket.
They are going to have skinnier
health insurance,
more deductibles.
And, again, that is something
that has proven
unpopular.
Why the Republicans want to
encourage that
is beyond my comprehension.
I think this points out it's a
loser bill.
We need to go back to the
drawing board and
try to get a bipartisan bill.
I think there is a compromise,
but only when
the Republicans give up on this
kind of approach.
JOHN YANG: Lanhee Chen, an
albatross, a loser
bill, what do you say?
LANHEE CHEN, Former Policy
Director, Mitt
Romney Campaign: Well, that's
certainly one
perspective.
I would argue that, in fact,
this bill is
a very good start.
I think, clearly, it's not
perfect.
There are improvements that need
to be made
in the bill.
But let's just start with a
couple of things.
First of all, obviously, the
Congressional
Budget Office estimates do
reveal that in
fact the bill is going to cut
the deficit,
it's going to cut spending over
the next 10
years and provide almost $1
trillion in tax
relief over the years -- over
the next 10
years.
So I think those are points you
are going
to hear supporters of the law
point to.
Clearly, on the coverage
numbers, the 24 million
number is a big number.
I think they have got some work
to do there.
The challenge is that, without
an individual
mandate, without a massive and
costly expansion
to Medicaid, you're not going to
see the same
kind of coverage numbers that
you saw out
of the Affordable Care Act.
I think Republicans need to be
willing to
accept that at least as
presently constituted,
their plan is not going to get
to the same
levels.
Now, the question becomes, are
people going
to have more choices?
Are premiums going down?
And indeed the CBO report finds
that beginning
in 2020, premiums are going to
go down and
consumers are going to have more
choices.
The reason why consumers might
want to buy
skinny down plans is because
they don't want
to pay for all of the excessive
benefits that
are mandated and required by the
Affordable
Care Act.
So, in fact, it's a quite
reasonable response
to what we have seen from the
over-regulation
created by the ACA over the last
10 years.
Now, in the employer
marketplace, let me just
make one point.
The CBO when they estimated the
Affordable
Care Act, or Obamacare, upon
passage also
noted that many millions of
Americans would
lose their coverage in the
employer marketplace.
It's not unusual to see shifting
between marketplaces
as it's created by a large-scale
reform such
as the ACA or the current bill
that Republicans
are considering.
JOHN YANG: Lanhee Chen...
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Let's just be
clear; $600
billion or so of this change is
going to be
tax cuts to the wealthiest 2 or
3 percent
of Americans, the insurance
companies, the
drug companies.
We're going to see Americans get
less insurance.
Lanhee Chen said that.
All right, which part of the
essential benefits
that the government is so-called
mandating
don't you want?
Hospital care?
Emergency room care?
Drug care?
Doctor care?
Preventative services?
LANHEE CHEN: Zeke, I would like
for Americans
to be able to choose the
benefits they want.
I don't believe that it makes
sense for Washington
to mandate the same plans
broadly across the
board.
(CROSSTALK)
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Lanhee, what
you're doing
is not giving them choice.
What you're doing is saying,
we're taking
away the money and we're going
to let you
choose with no money.
Health care is extremely
expensive.
It's $10,000 on average per
American.
Americans don't have that kind
of money.
LANHEE CHEN: It is, and the
Affordable Care
Act has made it less affordable.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: And they need
subsidies.
And we -- no, the Affordable
Care Act didn't
make it less affordable.
It made it more affordable.
LANHEE CHEN: Twenty-five percent
increase
in premiums silver plan year
over year from
2016 to 2017 sounds less
affordable to me,
Zeke.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: In fact, the
silver plan
is low than the CBO predicted in
2010.
It's actually been -- we have
been able to
control health care costs and
that has gone
on.
You tell me the one service on
the essential
benefits you're going to get rid
of that is
going to be better for people.
No Republican can say...
(CROSSTALK)
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: That's the one
they want
to throw out.
LANHEE CHEN: I'm not in the
business of telling
people what benefits they should
and shouldn't
have.
Look, the bottom line here is
this.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Lanhee, just
tell me what
benefit you don't want.
LANHEE CHEN: What this plan will
do is, it
will allow people to choose the
plans -- there
are things that I would choose.
They are not going to be the
same as the things
someone else would choose, Zeke.
That's the point here, that this
is not a
decision Washington should be
making.
And that's the point that
supporters of the
law have been making.
But, look, at the end of the day
the AHCA
actually, as you know, leaves
the essential
health care benefits in place
for now, because
they can't be removed through
reconciliation.
You know that better than
anybody else.
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN YANG: You talked about
premiums would
be going down.
But the CBO found that there is
going to be
a difference by age.
By 2026, premiums for a
21-year-old would
be 20 to 25 percent lower, for a
40-year-old,
10 percent lower.
But, for a 64-year-old, one year
before Medicare,
20 percent to 25 percent higher.
LANHEE CHEN: Well, yes, the
notion of insurance
again is about...
(CROSSTALK)
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: People who are
sick and who
need it are going to be...
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN YANG: Hold on.
Hold on.
Let him answer.
Let's let Lanhee Chen answer
that.
LANHEE CHEN: Yes.
The point is that any time you
create an insurance
marketplace, you are going to
have people
coming in and out of it.
You're going to have people of
different ages.
And it is the case that there is
going to
be variation across age
categories.
Look, the Affordable Care Act
increased premiums
significantly for younger
people.
It did bring the premiums down
for older people
because of the way the law was
structured.
So, there are always going to be
winners and
losers in these situations.
We have got to take look at
exactly what happens.
But, remember, what the AHCA,
What The Republican
proposal does is to create an
additional subsidy
to help people who are older.
Now, arguably, you could tweak
That subsidy
to give them even more support.
That may be a change want to
look at.
But the notion that there will
be differences
in costs of premiums across age
is not surprising
any time you have a large health
reform.
JOHN YANG: Thirty seconds, Dr.
Emanuel.
You want to respond?
(CROSSTALK)
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Wait a second.
And you take the subsidies way
down, so you
give people less money to buy
insurance.
This is a double whammy, which
is, we're going
to allow the premiums to go up,
and, by the
way, the amount of coverage is
going to go
down, because the essential
benefits are going
down.
So -- and we should also mention
that by 2022...
(CROSSTALK)
LANHEE CHEN: The essential
benefits aren't
touched by the law, Zeke.
You know that.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: They're
actually going to
send the premiums up for all
people 15 to
20 percent.
So, yes, by 2026, a decade from
now, premiums
for the younger will come down,
but, before
that, they are going to actually
go up.
So this is hardly a very good
thing if you're
going to say we're going to make
it cover
everyone and we're going to make
it cheaper.
It's not going to be cheaper.
JOHN YANG: Time, gentlemen.
Time.
I'm sorry.
We are going to have to leave it
there.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Yes.
Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Dr. Emanuel, Lanhee
Chen, thanks
for joining us.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's a
debate thanks
to hear.
Thanks to both of them.
And we want to hear what people
think on all
sides of the health care debate.
If you're concerned about health
care reform,
you can go online, find a brief
questionnaire
and share your experience.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
flies to
Asia tomorrow for high-stakes
visits to Japan,
South Korea and China, as
tensions in the
region mount over North Korea's
missile and
nuclear programs, but not flying
with Tillerson,
the State Department press
corps, a significant
change from prior
administrations.
This comes amid reports that
Tillerson has
been sidelined by the White
House on some
major international issues, and
that it wants
to slash State's budget by 37
percent.
Here to walk us through all this
and more
is chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner.
Margaret, welcome.
So, what do you make of all
this?
MARGARET WARNER: Judy, there is
just no doubt
this -- Rex Tillerson is the
lowest-profile
secretary of state in modern
times.
He has not uttered a word
publicly in the
United States since arrival
comments when
he joined state on February 2.
Overseas, he does give prepared
remarks, but
never takes a question from
reporters.
This issue about taking the
press corps on
such an important trip, that
began with Henry
Kissinger, who recognized it was
very useful.
He could background reporters,
get U.S. policy
out there, help shape the
coverage.
I'm told that, at the G20
meeting in Germany,
where his prepared remarks were
very well-received,
he had a private meeting with
the Russian
foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov.
Obviously, there are a lot of
issues there.
And he didn't want to do a joint
press conference
with Lavrov or have anything to
say.
And his aides said, look, if you
don't say
something, the Russians get to
characterize
this meeting.
So, he went before the American
reporters
who were there and he read a
short statement,
took no questions.
Here in Washington, he has not
been included
in allied leaders, important
allied leaders'
visits like the Japanese prime
minister or
Benjamin Netanyahu.
He didn't even present the
annual human rights
report 10 days ago, which
secretaries always
do in the Briefing Room to
demonstrate how
important that issue is to the
U.S.
And, in fact, the State
Department didn't
have a daily press briefing, as
they have
had ever since the '50s, until
about 10 days
ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how much
influence, Margaret,
is it believed that he has
internally?
MARGARET WARNER: That remains
something of
a mystery, Judy.
And we can't discount him.
Here's the former CEO of
ExxonMobil.
Tonight, he's going on a really
important
mission, as you explained in
your intro, tomorrow.
He's having dinner tonight with
the president
and with the national security
adviser, General
McMaster.
And, so far, there haven't been
opportunities
to see.
We know he had influence getting
Iraq off
the Muslim country travel ban
list, for example,
but, on other big issues, we
don't really
know whether he's going to have
influence.
For example, climate change,
he's in favor
of staying within the climate
change treaty.
But what has been happening, in
the absence
of statements of policy from the
State Department,
is that policy is made by
presidential tweet.
He wasn't involved in former
National Security
Adviser Michael Flynn saying
Iran was officially
on notice after this missile
test.
He wasn't consulted when Trump
said, with
Netanyahu, I'm agnostic on
whether it's a
one- or two-state solution.
That upends policy, but I'm told
that was
negotiated privately between the
Israelis
and Jared Kushner, his
son-in-law.
And the big concern among the
veteran diplomats,
Judy, is what is the role of
this sort of
shadow NSC that Bannon, Steve
Bannon, who
is a real America-firster, has
established
called the Strategic Initiatives
Group?
And is that going to really run
the show?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, finally,
Margaret, is
there a sense that there is a
design behind
all this, that there's a plan?
MARGARET WARNER: That is the
question that
people are asking.
Did he understand this low
profile was part
of his job?
Did he know that his choice for
deputy could
be rejected by the president?
And he is now in a department
without any
policy people to advise him.
One person said to me, it's like
a ghost ship.
You hear the wind in the sails,
but there's
no one's on deck.
Is he being sidelined by a sort
of Bannon-Kushner
operation inside the White
House?
Somebody who knows him well from
ExxonMobil
said she's really mystified that
-- quote
-- "He's not the person I knew."
She saw him as a large,
in-charge CEO.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating and,
as you said,
Margaret, a change from previous
administrations
going back to Richard Nixon.
MARGARET WARNER: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
thank you.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
assault on
reason -- Al Gore gives his take
on the Trump
presidency; it's Politics
Monday, a look ahead
to the upcoming fight over the
new health
care plan; and running on ice, a
marathon
over a frozen Siberian lake.
But first: South Sudan, the
world's youngest
country, founded in 2011, is in
freefall.
Three of its six years in
existence have been
spent fighting a civil war that
has left tens
of thousands dead.
Now the ravages of that war have
led to a
manmade famine.
Last week, the United Nations
reported that
7.5 million people there are in
need of assistance.
From South Sudan, John Ray of
Independent
Television News brings us this
report.
And a warning: Viewers may find
some of the
images upsetting.
JOHN RAY: Of South Sudan's many
torments,
hunger has become the greatest
terror of all.
It is a horror written in the
flesh and bones
of this little boy.
It has drawn the strength from
his limbs and
the life from his eyes.
His name is Khamis, 2 years old,
but weaker
than a newborn baby.
His mother has lost one child to
sickness,
lost family to war, and now
starvation threatens
her son.
LOMO LATABO, Mother (through
translator):
There is no food.
Anything we can find, we will
try to eat.
We find grass, we will eat it.
That's just the way it is for us
now.
JOHN RAY: The red warning signs
are everywhere.
At this screening center out in
the countryside,
we're told four out of every 10
children are
severely acutely malnourished.
In language any parent would
understand, they
risk starving to death.
So, with every exhausted step,
South Sudan
moves from the brink of genocide
into the
arms of famine.
For many days and many miles,
they have trekked
across a sand-blown wasteland in
search of
something to eat and somewhere
safe to stay.
Exhausted, famished, almost
finished, and
all they have gained is the
shade of a tree.
Everyone is hungry, the old
woman tells me,
but better here than at home.
WOMAN (through translator): The
soldiers came,
and so many people were killed,
even the women
and old people.
My children were shot in front
of me.
The houses were burnt, so we ran
to the bush.
JOHN RAY: There is food, but
nothing like
enough.
In the district center of
Ganyiel, a U.N.
plane has just delivered its
once-a-month
aid drop.
And in the baking heat, they
collect their
rations, but thousands have
arrived too late.
We found this woman picking
through the dirt
for a few grains split from the
sacks of cereal.
In the long grass all around,
there are many
like her.
This is all she has for the next
month.
"It shames and pains me," she
says, "but how
else can I live?"
The answer, for many, is to risk
the malaria-infested
marshes that line the River
Nile.
We watched William Gaul and his
family of
eight children arrive after a
19-day journey
from famine through fighting.
All they have eaten on the way
are water lilies.
WILLIAM GAUL, South Sudan
(through translator):
I have never seen so many people
die of hunger.
Only God can help us now.
Without God, I am afraid none of
us will survive.
JOHN RAY: This is Dalia, 6 years
old, perilously
thin.
Her fight for life is one tiny
front line
in a much wider struggle,
100,000 people on
the verge of starvation.
Dalia is precisely the same age
as her country,
uncertain fates intertwined.
But, like so many children,
Khamis knows only
fear and hunger, first the war,
then the famine,
now the reckoning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: Has faith in
the power
of reason fallen victim to
modern politics?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: Has faith in
the power
of reason fallen victim to
modern politics?
Ten years after its original
publication,
former Vice President Al Gore
has updated
his book "The Assault on
Reason."
Its new subtitle is telling:
"Our Information
Ecosystem: From the Age of Print
to the Age
of Trump."
I sat down with him this
afternoon, and started
by asking about the sharp
criticisms he made
in the original version against
then President
George W. Bush.
AL GORE, Former Vice President
of the United
States: My criticisms were not
mainly aimed
at any individuals, including
President George
W. Bush or Vice President
Cheney, but rather
the way in which our democratic
conversation
has been degraded over the last
several decades.
And I would say the same thing
about President
Trump.
For me, the most serious problem
is how our
nation became so vulnerable to
the assertion
of blatant falsehoods that drive
policy and
are not corrected by the
so-called immune
system of democracy, a free
press and a free
democratic discourse.
And I think we have a huge
systemic problem
that we have largely ignored.
When our founders created
America, it was
in the age of the printing
press, when individuals
could freely join the
conversation.
And that robust, democratic
dialogue more
often than not lifted up the
best available
evidence and asserted what was
more likely
to be true than not.
Now we have things that are
obviously false,
leading us to war, leading us to
deny people
health care, leading us to
ignore the climate
crisis.
We have to restore the integrity
of the democratic
conversation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, back when
you first wrote
the book, you were pretty
optimistic, you
wrote, that the Internet would
be an open
-- an opportunity for the kind
of discourse
that you would like to see.
AL GORE: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Has it turned out
that way?
AL GORE: Not as quickly as I had
hoped, that's
for sure.
I still do have hope, however.
If you look at the way all of
the new reform
movements dedicated to the
public interest
are living and thriving on the
Internet, I
do think there is still some
considerable
hope that the full participation
of individuals
in that conversation of
democracy can once
again restore the integrity of
the way our
democracy works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you write
about that
in the book, in the update, but
you also say
that you think it's wrong to go
after President
Trump as the principal cause of
the.
But, as you well know, there are
others out
there who are saying he is,
because -- a principal
cause, because of the language
we have heard
from him about how many people
showed up at
the inauguration, about how many
electoral
votes that he had.
AL GORE: Yes.
Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, why is he not
part of your
focus, a main part of your
focus?
AL GORE: Well, he is, and I
don't defend any
of that.
I just think that a much more
important part
of the problem we face, which
was evident
10 years ago and is even more
evident now,
is that the way we share
information among
ourselves as American citizens
has been radically
transformed.
We don't have -- the line
between news and
entertainment has almost
dissolved, where
ratings now have a big impact on
what kinds
of stories are covered and not
stories.
And when you talk about
President Trump, the
cable networks turned over so
many hours of
prime time to him.
Why?
Because he was entertaining, but
also because
it drove ratings.
And that is different from what
the news media
is supposed to focus on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how much
responsibility
does he bear for what's going
on?
AL GORE: Well, I mean, I think
that asserting
that former President Obama
wasn't born in
the United States was just the
height of irresponsibility,
of course.
And he corrected that one.
There are others that have yet
to be corrected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You met with
President Trump
during the transition in New
York, and you
have written about -- you have
said you have
been in touch with him since
then.
What's your take on him?
AL GORE: Well, what is the Latin
phrase, sui
generis?
He's one of a kind.
(LAUGHTER)
AL GORE: I think -- like a lot
of people,
I'm still trying to figure out
exactly what
he represents in American
politics.
But, if nothing else, he
represents a way
for tens of millions of people
who were desperate
for change to just turn the
table over and
say, we want to start over
again.
But it is a challenge for our
democracy.
It definitely is.
But, again, the remedy has to be
devoting
enough attention to restoring
the way we make
collective decisions in this
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
that can
be done with a -- even with a
president like
Donald Trump, who is as
outspoken as he is
and who makes the controversial
statements
that he does?
AL GORE: I hope so.
We're less than two months into
this experiment,
and people are already reaching
conclusions.
But, you know, George Orwell
once wrote that
a false belief sooner or later
collides with
physical reality, usually on a
battlefield.
That's what happened with the
invasion of
Iraq, and we're still bogged
down there.
That is what would happen if the
Congress
passed this pending health care
bill that
would knock so many millions of
people out
of coverage and raise the
expenses of so many
others.
That's a physical reality that
can't be finessed
with words and falsehoods.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is your take
on the man
the president chose to head the
Environmental
Protection Agency, Scott Pruitt,
who, by the
way, just last week said he
doesn't agree
that carbon dioxide is a primary
contributor
to climate change?
(LAUGHTER)
AL GORE: I know.
And that's a perfect example of
the problem
that I'm describing in "The
Assault on Reason."
Again, at some point, a false
belief collides
with physical reality.
We are seeing every night on the
television
news now a nature hike through
the Book of
Revelation.
These climate-related extreme
weather events
have convinced the vast majority
of people
that the scientists have been
right for a
long time.
We have to address this.
But putting someone in the EPA
who denies
even the most basic scientific
truth about
this, you know, it's -- the old
cliches are,
you can say the Earth is flat,
but it doesn't
mean you're going to fall off
the edge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying the
news media
can do its job and not be
accused on a regular
basis of being fake news, as
this president
does?
AL GORE: Yes, fake news has been
around as
long as news has been around.
But, again, the issue is, how
vulnerable are
we to it?
How can the immune system of
democracy, which
is not only the news media, but
also the free
speech we all enjoy and the way
we make decisions
collectively, how can that
better protect
us against blatant untruths that
are repeated
over and over again?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you
continuing to have
conversations with President
Trump?
AL GORE: Well, I'm not talking
about any dialogue
with him, direct or indirect.
I hope that our country remains
in the Paris
agreement.
But we face a climate crisis now
that is the
most serious challenge our
civilization has
ever confronted.
And the greatest country in the
world has
to remain a part of this
unprecedented global
agreement to deal with it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're
telling him that?
AL GORE: Well, again, I'm not
commenting on
my communications, because I
want to have
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
will leave it
there, former Vice President Al
Gore.
The book is "The Assault on
Reason," out with
a 10-years-later update.
AL GORE: I thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you very
much.
Now: With news continuing to
swirl around
health care reform and
wiretapping claims,
it's time for Politics Monday
with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report.
Welcome to both of you.
And before we talk about health
care, I have
to ask you, Amy, about what
former Vice President
Al Gore said, trying to be
optimistic about
the ability of the news media
to, in his words,
get the truth out of there in
the face of
a lot of, frankly, nontruths
floating around.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
Well, and we have created a
world now, us
as Americans, where we like to
surround ourselves
with news and information that
already confirms
our own bias.
It is very uncomfortable for us
to go outside
of that circle, and we do it not
just in the
channels that we choose, but in
the ways in
which we choose to get it.
Who are we following on
Facebook?
Who are we following on Twitter?
Usually, people who agree with
us.
And so we call something fake
news because
it challenge us our assumptions,
rather than
going to what we should be doing
is saying,
I should constantly be
challenging my assumptions.
So, it's not the news media.
It's partly the news media, but
it's really
the consumer as well, breaking
out of those
bubbles.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, you see
that challenge.
You're out there covering the
news every day.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes.
Well, and the actual fake news
is often the
news that confirms our biases,
that we want
to believe that it's too good --
as a news
consumer, it's too good to
check.
But, as a member of the news
media, you put
one foot in front of the other,
and you just
keep going and, you know,
reporting the numbers,
the CBO numbers, and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics
numbers, and also talking about
their methodology.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
And that's what we want to do
right now.
We did just get, in the last few
hours, this
report, analysis, Amy, from the
Congressional
Budget Office.
Some good news interest for
Democrats, a little
bit of good news for the
administration.
AMY WALTER: Well, if you're the
administration,
the first thing you look at, you
say, well,
it reduces the deficit, and that
is good news.
But at the core, Judy, this is
the challenge
for the Republican Party
fundamentally, which
is, the president of the United
States, who
is a Republican, went out on the
campaign
trail and even when he was
president-elect
and said things like,
everybody's going to
be covered, we're going to have
insurance
for everybody.
He said that over and over
again.
And the people in Congress and
those even
surrounding him, his HHS
secretary, the head
of the Budget Office, believe
that the issue
is not how many people are
covered, but whether
they have access to that
coverage.
And so you have a populist
president who promised
that everything was going to be
OK, we're
not going to touch Medicaid,
we're not going
to touch entitlements, you are
going to be
able to get everything, but it
is going to
be cheaper and better, and a
free market Republican
leadership who says, no, we
never promised
those things, we think that the
market can
take care of it.
So, those two things are going
to continue
to collide, regardless of what
the CBO report
says, and then we will see it in
a bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
the political
impact of this, Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, certainly
leading into
it, the Trump administration and
some in Congress
were sort of trying to work the
refs, trying
to discredit the report before
it ever came
out.
But these numbers are stark, you
know, 14
million people almost
immediately who will
not have insurance who have it
now.
The number goes up significantly
as time goes
on.
And, you know, if you look at
the breakdown,
the people who this report would
indicate
are the most likely to face
higher costs are
older people and poorer people.
And many of those people are the
very people
who supported Donald Trump,
people who show
up to his rallies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it seems like
this is going
to, in the short run anyway,
make it a little
bit harder for them to make the
case.
AMY WALTER: For them to sell it,
right, and,
more importantly, for the
president to be
able to sell it, because he's
the one who
talked about, everybody is going
to be able
to keep their health care.
And the headline number out of
this, of course,
are the millions of people who
will not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, the
other thing
I want to ask you all about is
what we heard,
that infamous or famous tweet,
Tam, from President
Trump two Saturday mornings
ago...
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... when he
accused President
Obama of wiretapping him in
Trump Tower in
a series of tweets that morning.
We really haven't stopped
talking about it
since then.
The White House has not yet come
forward -- or
the administration has not come
forward with
any evidence to back it up,
despite a request
by the Hill.
And we just now have seen -- and
you were
telling us about it -- a
statement by the
Justice Department saying
they're asking for
more time to respond to this
request.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
So, the Justice Department got
in touch with
the chairman and the ranking
member of the
House Intelligence Committee,
which had asked
them to produce evidence that
President Trump
had been wiretapped.
And they're asking for more
time.
The administration, you know, we
have been
asking Sean Spicer, the press
secretary, where
did the president get this from,
what is his
source?
And he said, well, there have
been lots of
reports out there.
But he won't say whether that
was the president's
source.
In a new turn today, he said
that, well, when
the president said wiretapping,
he put it
in quotes, and because it was in
quotes, maybe
he was talking more broadly
about surveillance,
even though there were other
tweets where
the president said his phones
were tapped,
and that wasn't in quotes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I guess Sean
Spicer's comment
was, he may not have meant it
literally.
So...
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, we're back to
literally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're back to
AMY WALTER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, where
does this go
from here?
We're waiting to see if there is
any evidence.
But, meanwhile, this is a very
serious charge
that the current president
levels against
the previous.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Yes.
And I want to go back to where
you started
this conversation, Judy, about
the public
and their frustration with the
media, this
idea about fake news, and who
they trust and
who they don't.
And as I watch the story unfold,
I think I
can understand where a lot of
Americans get
frustrated with this story.
The president tweeted something
out that clearly
is completely unfounded, in the
same way he
tweeted out this statistic that
there are
three million to five million
Americans who
voted illegally, that the
president wasn't
born in this country.
And the news media's job is to
report that
this is unfounded, we haven't
seen any evidence
of this.
But, every day, the question is
presented
to Sean Spicer or Kellyanne
Conway, when it
looks like in a way that the
media's trying
to get a gotcha.
Let's make them have to say that
he was wrong.
Let's put them in an
uncomfortable position.
And I think what Americans are
looking for
is, we get it, he said something
that's unfounded,
but it looks like the media is
trying to prove
a point, rather than trying to
look out for
the other issues that are out
there, spend
more time focusing on health
care and those
other issues.
I understand undermining the
president, the
former president, is a big
issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But without
pushing forward,
Tam, you're left with a sort of
ragged uncertainty.
If you stop talking about it,
stop asking
about it, then, basically,
you're leaving
it unresolved.
TAMARA KEITH: And, at the
moment, it is still
very much unresolved.
AMY WALTER: But do you have to
do it every
single day?
I agree it is unresolved, and
that question
has to be answered.
But I don't think we're going to
-- we're
not going to get an answer.
TAMARA KEITH: But -- and more to
the point,
we keep trying to ask the
president, too.
And he hasn't yet answered
either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's not going
to...
AMY WALTER: And he's never going
to admit
-- we know this.
If it's not true, he will not
admit that it's
not true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we may
discuss this
again.
AMY WALTER: We will.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, thank
you both.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
back shortly
with a story about a marathon
that takes place
on a lake, frozen lake, that is.
But, first, we ask you to take a
moment to
hear from your local PBS
station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps to keep
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps to keep
programs like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now
to our "NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught
our eye that might be of
interest to you,
too.
While many of us can't wait for
temperatures
to thaw, one Russian community
thinks this
is the best time of year for a
run, and a
chilly one.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
explains.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Siberia's Lake
Baikal, it's
the world's oldest and deepest
freshwater
lake.
It's also the perfect spot for a
midwinter
marathon.
MAN (through translator): It is
a tradition.
I do not want to miss it.
So as long as I have energy, I
will take part
in this race.
JULIA GRIFFIN: If a foot race
could ever be
considered an extreme sport, it
is the annual
JULIA GRIFFIN: If a foot race
could ever be
considered an extreme sport, it
is the annual
Baikal Ice Marathon, a 26.2-mile
dash from
one side of a lake to another,
in subfreezing
temperatures, over nothing but
ice.
This year, 200 participants from
32 countries
enthusiastically signed up.
MAN: This is a great race, and
we hope everybody enjoys it.
JULIA GRIFFIN: At the starting
line this year,
temperatures hovered around an
unexpectedly
balmy 12 degrees.
Runners strapped on their snow
cleats and
stuck athletic tape to exposed
skin.
There was also the odd pair of
butterfly wings.
MARINA ANDERSEN, Marathon
Runner: I love this
place.
I think The temperature is
pretty warm today.
I expected it to be colder.
But I think it's a good start
for me
to start ice-running.
JULIA GRIFFIN: With
a shout of a megaphone, they're
off.
As
minutes and hours pass, the
clusters of runners
disperse.
One by one, they brave the slick
ice, blistering
winds, burning sun, with only
ambition to
cheer them on.
But the psychological challenges
don't end
there.
The flat, featureless landscape
makes it difficult
for runners to gauge their
progress.
Only periodic refreshment
stands, with tea,
water and a variety of snacks,
mark the miles.
Yet, Bartosh Maserski of Poland
crossed the
finish line with a
record-setting time of
two hours, 53 minutes and 26
seconds.
He had to miss last year's
marathon, so this
was a redeeming victory.
BARTOSH MASERSKI,
MD-BO /Marathon Winner:
I broke my leg two days before
marathon.
I come back here.
I do it, and I am very, very
happy.
JULIA GRIFFIN: For a frigid foot
race, a heartwarming
end.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have got to
give them credit.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday: one day ahead of a
general election
in the Netherlands, a look at
the continued
rise of the right in Europe.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.